Add security threat model to docs (#2219)
apache/logging-log4j2: src/site/asciidoc/security.adoc

The threat model that Log4j uses considers configuration files as safe input controlled by the programmer; **potential vulnerabilities that require the ability to modify a configuration are not considered vulnerabilities** as the required access to do so implies the attacker can execute arbitrary code.
====

[#model]
== Threat Model

Log4j is a low level library where configuration inputs and the classpath are expected to be controlled by the programmer.

> Configurations have the ability to execute arbitrary code through custom plugins.

Reviewer: Arbitrary code can very well be executed in a mere configuration, say, using `ScriptFilter`; using plugins is not a necessity.
```suggestion
Configurations have the ability to execute arbitrary code.
```

While specific Log4j plugins (such as a JNDI lookup) may use constraint validators or conditionals to require additional settings to opt in to functionality, this is not universally required by custom plugins.
Specific security considerations involved in our threat model are detailed below.

=== Parameterized Logging

When using a log message containing template parameters like `{}`, only the format string is evaluated for parameters to be substituted.
The message parameters themselves are not evaluated for parameters; they are only included in the format string corresponding to their template position.
The conversion of message parameters into a string is done on-demand depending on the layout being used.

> When structure-preserving transformations of log message data are required, the `Message` API should be used for logging structured data.

Reviewer 2: I would advise users to only use compile-time constants as format strings and under no circumstance build format strings from user data.

> When structure-preserving transformations of log message data are required, the `Message` API should be used for logging structured data.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we rather have said the following instead?
```suggestion
When structure-preserving transformations of log message data are required, layouts supporting this functionality (e.g., `JsonTemplateLayout`) should be used.
```

Author: It's both. Since the APIs for specifying non-string values into the thread context is kind of awkward, and it can be wasteful to store things there which are only relevant for a single log message, it's useful to use something like a `MapMessage`, and yes, you need to combine that with something like JTL to preserve the structure of the message.

=== Unstructured Logging

When using an unstructured layout such as `PatternLayout`, no guarantees can be made about the output format.
This layout is mainly useful for development purposes and should not be relied on in production applications.

> For example, if a log message contains new lines, these are not escaped or encoded specially unless the configured pattern uses the `%encode{pattern}{CRLF}` wrapper pattern converter (which will encode a carriage return as the string `\r` and a line feed as the string `\n`) or some other `%encode` option.

Author: Added

Similarly, other encoding options are available for other formats, but pattern layouts cannot make assumptions about the entire output.
As such, when using unstructured layouts, no user-controlled input should be included in logs.

> It is strongly recommended that a structured layout is used instead for these situations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is strongly recommended that a structured layout (e.g., `JsonTemplateLayout`) is used instead for these situations.
```

> Note that `StrLookup` plugins (those referenced by `${...}` templates in configuration files) that contain user-provided input should not be referenced by a pattern layout.

Reviewer: JTL also uses lookups too. Hence, they should not be used anywhere anyway.

```suggestion
Note that `StrLookup` plugins (those referenced by `${...}` templates in configuration files) that contain user-provided input should not be referenced by layouts.
```

=== Structured Logging

When using a structured layout (most layouts besides pattern layout), log messages are encoded according to various output formats.
These safely encode the various fields included in a log message.

> For example, the JSON template layout can be configured to output log messages in various JSON structures where all log data is properly encoded into safely parseable JSON.

Reviewer: To comply with the naming convention used in previously shared layout names...
```suggestion
For example, the `JsonTemplateLayout` can be configured to output log messages in various JSON structures where all log data is properly encoded into safely parseable JSON.
```

This is the recommended mode of operation for use with log parsing and log collection tools that rely on log files or arbitrary output streams.

=== Code Signing

Log4j artifacts are all signed using PGP using a key from the Logging Services PMC https://downloads.apache.org/logging/KEYS[KEYS file].
Information on how to verify releases signed with PGP is https://httpd.apache.org/dev/verification.html[documented here].

> Individual jar files are not signed using `jarsigner` (only PGP), and the Log4j plugin system does not rely on signed jars for validation (unlike the Java cryptography APIs for example).

Reviewer: We can do without mentioning every single option we do not do.
```suggestion
```

This remote location must be kept safe from unauthorized modifications.
When configurations are modified through JMX, the JMX server should be safely configured to require authentication and a secure connection if being accessed over the network.
When configurations are provided through JNDI, these should only use the `java` scheme for sharing configurations in a JavaEE or JakartaEE application service.
JNDI-sourced configurations should not use other JNDI providers such as LDAP, DNS, or RMI, as all these providers are difficult to properly secure.

=== Cryptographic Logs

When using custom plugins to calculate message authentication codes, signatures, or encrypted logs, proper key management must be considered.
Cryptography is a tricky subject, and key management lies at the heart of most design problems to solve when using it.
If a custom plugin relies on a pre-shared key or password of some sort, it is likely broken beyond repair if being used for cryptographic purposes.
Proper key management typically uses public key infrastructure (PKI) such as X.509 certificates, though this is not the only option.

> It is beyond the scope of Log4j to implement key management as this would depend on other infrastructure in use for validating or decrypting logs combined with the deployment and runtime environment of the logging application.

Reviewer: Cryptographic logs are neither a feature we slightly offer, nor something we even briefly mention. This is not a place we educate users on cryptographic logs either. Hence... I think we can do without this section.

Author: True, it's not a current offering, but:

* The Flume plugin has some sort of half-assed support for encryption that violates these guidelines.
* We have a few feature requests related to this in Jira (mostly around encrypting logs, but there was another issue for signed logs).

I did research about this a few years ago, but my original implementation idea was fairly complex. Anyways, this section could perhaps be deferred until we have such a feature.
